The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is space exploration.
We're putting two limitations on that subject. One, that the exploration be outside the solar
system, and two, that the story or novel we discuss involve the process of searching or
exploring primarily, not simply the result of the exploration.
And especially with those limitations, I think we have perhaps the purest of all science
fiction themes or plots. Man's history on this planet has been a process of searching,
discovering, then taming or civilizing. The discovery of the New World, for instance,
was the result of a deliberate act of search by various European explorers, culminating
with Columbus. The American West, as discovered and mapped by Lewis and Clark, is a classic
example of exploration. Now, space, or our galaxy, the universe, is simply the next area
to explore and discover and tame. I think the importance and purity of the theme lies in
the notion that searching and discovering is the very essence of human nature. It's
the first step in the process of searching and discovering.
We've discovered the frontiers of Earth, and now we're ready to confront, we must confront,
what one influential science fiction production is called the final frontier.
Star Trek first came on the air in 1966 and continued through 1969, with 78 episodes being
completed for the series. The show had several major science fiction authors writing for it,
including Harlan Ellison, Theodore Sturgeon, and David Gerald.
It would be hard to think of a better example of the space exploration theme. I think Star
Trek epitomizes that, because episode after episode, you saw the members of, crew members of the
Enterprise confront aliens, all sorts of problems in a hostile universe, but they kept going,
their spirit, their courage, their desire to go beyond mankind's limits almost, carried the
show for a long time, and I think it sort of is the essence of the space exploration theme,
for pure exploration's sake. It was a fairly popular show when it was on the air, but it
gained in popularity considerably after it went off the air and went into syndication,
conventions or held Star Trek conventions, and it eventually spawned a movie.
Well, fitting in with your parameters on space exploration, we never saw the Enterprise going
on a particular mission to do something in particular. It was always just out there exploring,
and with no particular thing in mind, and whatever happened to it seemed to happen by accident,
or just, it just happened. They were out there in an alien ship advanced upon them,
or they found some planet with a distress signal calling out, but they were never really going
to any particular place as far as we were told. I believe that really is kind of covered in the
preamble to the show, where William Shatner says they're on that five-year mission to explore
new planets and to discover what's out there. I think that has to be one of the reasons the
show is so popular again, because simply it satisfies people's need for the unknown,
for the search, for the exploration to seek something which is mysterious, which is unknown.
It's simply caught the imagination, I think, of more than simple, more than pure science fiction
fans. I think everybody was fascinated with that kind of theme. I think this is especially shown
in the episode called The Side of Paradise. Yes, I think they did that theme a number of times,
not a number, but every so often. I think that particular episode is the best expression of it,
but they advanced to this particular planet and beamed down as they did on their transporters.
There was a particular planet on this planet that shot spores whenever one of the crew
members got near it. These spores would seemingly, well, cause a state of total happiness, total
contentment in the individual. He didn't have a sense of a goal. He didn't want to strive.
He simply wanted to stagnate. I'm reminded of the poem by Tennyson, The Lotus Eaters,
where the crew of Ulysses ate the lotus plant and wanted to stay on the island forever without
moving, without striving, without trying. Kirk, the captain, Captain Kirk is one of the few who
was not infected by the spores. With the power of his personality, his cleverness, he is able to
overturn the influence these spores have had on his crew members. But I think the significance of
it is that they are going to continue. They're not satisfied. They're not content. They would have
been perfectly happy to live the rest of their existence on this planet. It was sort of an
Eden, a paradise. But that's not enough for people. They need a goal. They need something to
strive for, or they're not human. And Kirk is able to get the crew members back to their original
states and the enterprise goes on. For an example of a novel that deals strictly in this type of
space exploration, let's turn to a novel called The Voyage of the Space Beagle. It's written by
a collection of four short stories that he tied together with a new character. The original
short stories were Black Destroyer and Discord and Scarlet written in 1939, M33 and Andromeda
written in 1943, and War of Nerves written in 1950. These four stories he took and tied together
with the theme of going out and exploring space with these four episodes becoming four things
that happen to the ship and the people on it. In each of the stories we meet a different kind of
alien and have to deal with it in a life and death situation. The first of these episodes takes
place when the crew lands on an alien planet and is discovered by a creature named Curl. Curl is a
cat-like creature and he soon lures his way on board the ship. The scientists are very eager to
study him and see what his physiological makeup is like and how his psychology has adapted into this
type of planet and generally what he is. Elliot Groesvenor, the main character that ties the
stories together, is somewhat suspect of Curl and his suspicions are well founded. In an accident,
they discover that Curl can control electrical energies through his body and once Curl discovers
that the human beings have learned this from him, he becomes immediately very fearful of them. He's a
very very powerful creature and they lock him inside a cage but he manages to negate the
electronic lock and get out and starts horribly killing the crewman and then running back to the
sail and locking him back inside it hoping to create a panic on board the ship. The crew almost
immediately discovers what is happening and becomes a war between the crew and the creature.
In the end, Curl leaves the ship by means of a lifeboat because he doesn't understand the
faster than light driving the ship. He attempts to fly back toward his planet but he's traveling away
from his planet faster than he is traveling toward it when he leaves the ship and even though he's
flying toward his planet, his planet still recedes into the distance and he goes insane trying to
figure this out. The second episode in the book which is one of the original short stories is
about a race of aliens that are very bird-like called the rim or the rim people. They have an
entirely mental existence. They communicate by telepathy and they try to contact the space beagle
with their mental emanations through telepathy and they're friendly. All they want to do is contact
the ship but it creates havoc on the space beagle. This mental power that enters the spaceship
drives some of them in mad. It causes psychological aberrations. It brings out hostilities. It
exaggerates certain mental conditions in the crew and Grossman or the same one who was suspicious
of Curl in the previous episode is able with his specialized equipment to mentally contact the
rim to let them know what's happening and ask them to call off their attack which is done and
the space beagle is allowed to continue. The third section of the book deals with a somewhat
different type of alien. The space beagle is voyaging between galaxies in intergalactic space
where there is absolutely nothing. When all of a sudden they come across the path of an alien
who seems to be floating in this intergalactic void. The alien had no hope of ever reaching
one of the galaxies. He was stranded out there when the ship just happened to pass by and the
alien immediately taps some of the energy from the drive of the ship and stops the ship dead in
its tracks. The humans crawl out of the ship and fix the exterior and then they notice the alien
floating right by the ship. The alien comes aboard the ship after they try to capture him in a cage
and immediately recognizes the situation as being very advantageous to him. This creature is extremely
powerful and he's from an ancient civilization that existed in the previous cycle of the universe.
When that universe exploded this creature was shot out into the place where they found him
without any hope of gaining access to a galaxy. When he meets the men he is able to use them as
host creatures or bodies for his eggs in order to raise up more of these creatures.
The Ixtel as the alien is called in the book takes over part of the ship and it's really a race
between him and the rest of the humans as to who's going to control. If the humans allow him to
gain the upper hand he will eventually control all of the galaxy that they're going to.
The only way that the humans could rid themselves of Ixtel was by using their mental agility and
leaving the ship long enough that they could impose a force field of energy that would kill the
creature. The creature found out what they were doing just in time to escape and he got back into
his original fix floating out in middle of intergalactic space with no hope of ever gaining
access to the galaxy as the humans went on to their next episode. The last one involves
the creature very difficult to describe it's sort of a cloud a huge cloud creature without any
particular name but it feeds on death it started out as a very small small organism.
It's first of all it fed on the deaths of insects then smaller animals and larger animals.
It kept growing all the while and it's gotten so huge that it needs the the deaths of creatures
on an entire planet to exist. So it's gained the power and the size and the strength to terraform
planets and as the space beagle goes through a particular system they find that all of the
planets they're passing are similar. They're covered with tropical vegetation with large
primitive kinds of animals engaged in conflict which leads to to many deaths that this creature is
feeding on. The scientists on the space beagle figure out what's happening and realize that their
own solar system is in great danger because this creature is expanding all the time and they're
afraid it's going to come to their own solar system. So they devise a plan whereby they
they start destroying the planets that the creature is feeding on and lure him out into
interstellar space where he is not allowed where he's not able to feed so that he is going to he
will we know die away from the source of the death which nourishes him. So again through their
cleverness through their ingenuity the the humans have triumphed over an alien which when you come
right down to it is much more powerful than they are and I believe that typifies a lot of the things
in the novel in that the humans are always overcoming their adversaries by means of their
cleverness. They seem to outwit aliens that are much more powerful than they are physically and
in some instances by specialized powers that they have. Curl could manipulate electromagnetic
energies and Ixtel could move through solid matter but even with these abilities
the humans by their own ingenuity could outwit their adversaries. I think we should say something
for the aliens though in most of the pulp novels of the time that this one was written
we have so many of the bug-eyed monsters that are nothing more than monsters. Here we have
aliens that are truly intelligent and are fighting humans on a much greater level than just physical
terror. They they're well thought out they have purpose and a plan and we can say that these are
really better aliens than what you would expect to find in most of the pulp novels of this time.
I think that tradition that change in the way the bug-eyed monsters were
were written about in science fiction came back in the 30s with Stanley Weinbaum,
Martian Odyssey and Asimov is described that as the first science fiction story in which the aliens
are not simply humans in a strange form. They have their own reasons for existing,
they have their own ecology, they belong to a particular planet and they're part of that planet.
I think all of the aliens in this particular book are the realistic in terms of having an ecology
built around them and having a psychology, a physiology which is not human. How shall we
characterize this novel and is it pulp fiction or is it something superior to that? Well when
Van Vogt started writing the stories he was writing in the pulp tradition, it was still in the late
30s when he started to write these stories which became the space beagle. But I think he goes
beyond that. He has a, even though he was trained in the pulp tradition, I think he has a more skill,
he's more modern perhaps under the influence of the editor John Campbell and he's able to go
beyond the pulp formulas. These are realistic aliens, the humans in the book are characterized by
realistic motives, they're not simply the plain hero types, they have their quirks, they have their
bad points to humans. In fact they all have to overcome the bad parts of human nature
before they can defeat the aliens themselves. So I think this is a step beyond the pulp tradition
even though the formulas and all the intentions of the story I think are the same as the early
pulp magazines but Van Vogt is able to go beyond that.
For our second consideration we turn to a novel by Paul Anderson written in 1970.
Tau Zero is a special kind of a science fiction book. There's not very many just like it.
That's only one category that Anderson writes with is the kind of book that Tau Zero is.
He writes almost anything. He writes pure fantasy, he'll write so-called soft or social science fiction
but there's nobody better at writing hard science fiction than Paul Anderson. I think Tau Zero is
perhaps his best example in that particular form because there's a great deal of science in the
book and some readers might even think that it's a little obtrusive if they don't understand some
of the concepts of relativity and the Bussard ramjet for instance.
The science in the novel actually makes it extremely realistic. It's one of the more believable
of the pure space epics that's ever been written. The story is essentially that of a colony ship,
a ship full of people I think about 50 people who are traveling to a colony at a nearby star
to set up and start life there and on the way after they've gone part of the way toward the star
the ship runs into a small nebula of gas which causes the ship to lose its power of deceleration.
They cannot decelerate without causing so much radiation harm that they would all be killed.
The only way that they can hope to exist is to keep on accelerating until they can get to a place
that is relatively free of gas where they can go outside the ship outside of the protective barriers
and shielding of the ship to repair that deceleration device. The story that develops is that the ship
cannot find a place that is free enough of gas that they can go out and repair the ship
and it keeps on accelerating until it's actually going through galaxies.
But no matter how fast they go they can never go beyond the speed of light because Anderson,
as we said before, is extremely true to the scientific knowledge of our day and according
to the knowledge that we have faster than light travel is impossible so he has to dream up a method
whereby this exploration trip can go fast enough to get somewhere and he's devised or he's used
a ship called the Bussard Ramjet to do this. The Bussard Ramjet is not a new idea. It was
invented somewhere in the middle of this century. The basic format is that the ship picks up interstellar
gas molecules by the use of a huge electromagnetic web of sorts, a force field if you will,
that scoops up these interstellar particles and shoots them out the back end. This provides
reaction mass which drives the ship forward. The point is that the faster the ship goes,
the more gas molecules it supposedly will contact and shoot out the back end there by increasing
its speed more and more and more on a vicious cycle. The ship would be extremely radioactive
to the point where there would be needed extreme shielding for any human beings to
be able to ride the thing. I believe in the works of Larry Niven he had the same kind of a ship
that was not habitable and he had robots that used this ship and everybody else had to come
along on the slow boats. Here however, Paul Anderson has had this ship big enough and sealed well
enough that humans can ride it. The trouble is when they hit that gas cloud that it not only
destroyed their deceleration method, it also sped them up quite a bit to the point where they were
already past where they would have had to stop and turn around and slow down to get to their
original destination. The speed of the ship is one of the basic problems the crew must overcome.
The great speed brings the theory of relativity into play. One of the basic concepts of the
theory of relativity is that the speed that time passes is relative to the speed that an
object is moving. If you have two ships traveling through space with ship A traveling faster than
ship B, time will be moving slower on ship A than on ship B. In other words, the faster a ship moves,
the slower time passes on that ship relative to other slower moving objects surrounding it.
Everything appears normal on the ship to the crew and time seems to be passing faster on objects
traveling slower than the ship. As hours and days pass on the ship, months and years pass on earth,
and the faster they travel, the greater this time difference becomes. Eventually the crew,
while traveling between galaxies, watches the universe collapse into a huge mass.
This ties in the currently accepted theories of the origin of the universe by most of the scientific
world. The Big Bang theory, of course, in which the universe began as one monomass of
energy that explodes outward. There are two currently popular views of this. One is that
the universe would then continue to expand until it eventually burnt itself out, and that would be
all a one-time only affair. Or that the universe would again withdraw by gravitational force
back into a monomass and explode again, thus doing it numerable times, limitless times.
This is the cyclic theory, and this is what Paul Anderson portrays in Tau Zero. The people on board
the ship go so fast that the universe dies around them. The time has passed exterior to the ship
in great quantities. Of course, earth and all of its peoples and,
assumably, humankind is long gone, and they are the only ones left. And they're waiting out
the result of this withdrawal of the universe back into a monomass to see what happens, hopefully
for them it will explode again. It's one of the things that Anderson tries to bring across is the
incredible amount of time that has passed while they've been on this incredibly fast flight across
the universe. Millions and billions of years have passed as the universe contracts back down into one
large monomass before it explodes back out and creates new galaxies, new solar systems. And at
the end of the novel, they eventually land on one. They're able to slow down, and they land on one,
and begin to colonize. And presumably then they will carry on the human race simply from the
50 members on this ship that have survived into a new universe. To me, that's one of the most
fascinating of all exploration, journeys of exploration, is to see the death of a universe
in the beginning of another one. That's fascinating the way Anderson treats that material. It's
a theme to strive, to seek, to never give up. And particularly with two characters on the book,
I think we see Anderson attempting to show two sides of human nature that allow it to persist
and to survive. You have a woman, Ingrid Lindgren, who is second in command on the ship. She
epitomizes feeling, emotion, love, compassion. We have Charles Raymott, who is the, I guess you'd
call him the policeman, the only military man on board who is there to keep order.
He is pure practicality, pure survival. He'll do anything to survive. He's very an emotional,
very practical man. Together, those two are able to keep the crew intact. They're able to give it
hope. And they are the ones who are able to, well, allow the crew to survive into this new
universe where humanity will keep going. The voyage of the space beagle in tau zero, I think we
would call two of the more classic treatments of the space exploration theme. But there are many
and ingenious methods, many varied ways that authors have come up with to illustrate that
particular theme. Always, I think, showing the desire of the human spirit to escape any kind
of restraint. One early example, I think, and probably still one of the
more popular ones is the idea that Heinlein illustrated in Orphans of the Sky, published from
two earlier short stories in 1941. He uses the device of a generation ship, which is an artificial
world, complete and self-sufficient, constructed and inhabited by human beings, which is sent slowly
toward the stars. The original members won't live to arrive, of course, but their descendants will,
many generations removed. And that is one method of space exploration, although one which is a
little discouraging, I guess, to the original crew. In the film Dark Star, the protagonists are
traveling throughout our galaxy, discovering new solar systems which have habitable planets on them
and destroying all the unstable planets in that system in order to make the system safe for colonization.
And one other rather unusual story we might mention is by Larry Niven. It's called Rammer. It was a
short story and then made into a novel, A World Out of Time. Here, a corpse sickle, a person who has
had himself frozen in order that he might be revived later for medical treatment, I think the
fellow had cancer or some such disease, awakes into a future society where they want him for
only one purpose or they don't want him at all, and that's to pilot a starship. The fellow is amazed,
but he goes along with it because it's his only hope for life, takes the starship and escapes away
from the society that has programmed him to do their seeding of planets that they want him to do,
and goes out on his own to explore the galaxy or whatever he finds that meets his interest.
Space exploration is the cornerstone of postulative fiction, for the earth is well known and has
become a very small place in a very big universe. If man is to leave the earth as he has already
begun to do, he will have to explore, whether it's for the sake of exploring or for practical
reasons of colonization and exploitation or both. Although there are science fiction stories that
do not deal in off earth settings, the majority by far are based on the assumption of space travel
and exploration, as we try to imagine what could lie ahead for humanity in the worlds of tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.